PMID: 41673350
Title: A pilot randomized controlled trial comparing the feasibility and preliminary effects of different forms of exercise-related social support for older adult survivors of cancer.
Journal: Supportive care in cancer : official journal of the Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer
Authors: Smith-Turchyn, Jenna; Sinclair, Susanne; O'Loughlin, Erin; Innes, Anthea; Richardson, Julie; Pillips, Stuart; Beauchamp, Marla; Thabane, Lehana; Wrosch, Carsten; Sabiston, Catherine M

Abstract:
To determine the feasibility and effectiveness of two forms of social support (peer and peer plus virtual professional support) on quality of life, feelings of support, and exercise levels in older adult survivors of cancer.
We conducted a pilot randomized controlled trial. Participants were randomized to the AgeMatchPLUS (peer support plus weekly qualified exercise professional support) or AgeMatch (peer support only) group. The primary outcome was feasibility (measured by recruitment, retention, adherence rates). Secondary outcomes included quality of life, social support, exercise volume, and physical activity enjoyment. Outcomes were measured at baseline (T1), post-intervention (10-weeks post baseline (T2)), post-tapering (14-weeks post baseline (T3)), and at 6-months follow-up (T4). Data was analyzed using descriptive statistics and a multiple linear regression was performed for all secondary outcomes to determine estimates of effect between groups.
Virtual peer and professional exercise-related social support are feasible for older adults survivors of cancer. Those matched with a peer in addition to virtual professional support demonstrated improved exercise-related social support and resistance training volume post-intervention. No other significant differences were found between groups, with both groups significantly increasing their exercise levels across the study.
We demonstrated the feasibility and benefit of peer matching, both independently and alongside professional support, for older survivors of cancer. Future research efforts should examine the effectiveness of this intervention on a larger scale and compare outcomes to a no intervention group.
This trial was registered on clinicaltrials.gov (NCT05549479, August 23, 2022).
