PMID: 41671476
Title: Community Participatory Co-Design and Development of a Digital Diabetes Prevention Education Program for Hispanic Families With Obesity: Mixed Methods Study.
Journal: JMIR formative research
Authors: Mihail, Sandra; Partida, Marbelly; Villanueva, Lizette; Thompson, Debbe; O'Connor, Teresia M; Musaad, Salma M; Redondo, Maria J; Soltero, Erica G

Abstract:
Digital health interventions (DHIs) can extend the reach of disease prevention interventions; however, few are evidence-based, theoretically grounded, or developed for high-risk youth and families. Co-design approaches engage end users in the design and development of the DHI, which can lead to increased accessibility and engagement.
This study aimed to describe the adaptation of an evidence-based diabetes prevention program for remote, digital delivery.
The adaptation of the in-person intervention was guided by a modified Inclusive Digital Health Intervention Design to Promote Health Equity framework and conducted in collaboration with Hispanic adolescents (n=23) with obesity (BMI ≥95th percentile) and their parents (n=15). Focus groups identified digital, health education, and support needs. An expert and community panel assisted in developing solutions based on these findings. A sample content session with a food tasting experience was created and reviewed by participants. The research team subsequently built a digital platform to host the content. Participants assessed the usability of the platform, including the ease of use, design components, and technical issues. A second meeting of the expert panel provided recommendations for further refinement and feedback.
Findings from focus groups indicated that most participants (31/36, 86.1%) reported stable internet access and multiple digital devices. With regard to format, a few parents (2/9, 22.2%) preferred synchronous content sessions, while most youth and parents favored asynchronous sessions (7/9, 77.8%) lasting 40 to 60 minutes. Health education needs included interactive content, healthy recipes, and the ability to ask questions. Experts suggested offering asynchronous sessions with monthly synchronous meetings to meet both parent and youth needs. After viewing a sample session, families found the content easy to understand and mostly engaging, with (17/21) 81% participating in the food tasting activity and all participants reporting that the activity was feasible. Experts recommended using a more conversational, interactive teaching style to improve the content and using a food box with nonperishable items to increase the ease of food tasting activities. While the digital platform was functional and easy to use, families highlighted the need for larger font and icon sizes, easier navigation, and better color contrasts. On the basis of this feedback, experts advised creating tutorial videos and an orientation session for platform training. The content and platform will continue to be refined before further evaluation in a 12-week feasibility pilot study.
The use of a co-design approach provided opportunities to make content more interactive and engaging and to increase the ease of use of the digital platform. Describing the adaptation process using a guiding framework in collaboration with the focus population will inform future studies aiming to adapt evidence-based interventions to a digital platform.
