PMID: 41674460
Title: Cognitive Communication, Voice and Swallowing Difficulties Experienced by Adults With Long-COVID: A Scoping Review.

Abstract:
Adults with Long-COVID frequently experience impairments in cognitive-communication, voice and swallowing, however, few comprehensive reviews of the existing literature has yet to be conducted to map the current research landscape. To go some way toward addressing this gap, this scoping review collected and analysed relevant published studies to identify reported symptoms related to cognitive communication, voice and swallowing in post COVID-19 patients and the assessments used to identify these difficulties.
This study aimed to systematically map the existing literature on cognitive-communication, voice and swallowing difficulties in individuals living with Long-COVID and the assessments used to identify these difficulties.
Four databases were searched to identify original research articles aligned with the study's objectives. Studies meeting the inclusion criteria were selected, and the findings were analysed with a specific focus on three key symptom domains: cognitive-communication, voice and swallowing.
Nineteen studies met the inclusion criteria. A broad range of assessments were used, and a broad range of symptoms were identified related to cognitive-communication, voice and swallowing difficulties in patients with Long-COVID-19. The symptoms reported most frequently in the selected studies included memory deficits, incomplete or inefficient glottic closure, paradoxical vocal fold motion during inspiration, episodes of choking, globus sensation, premature spillage and pyriform sinus residue.
Despite limited prior research in this area, the findings underscore the significant impact that COVID-19 infection may have on cognitive communication, voice and swallowing functions. Post-COVID-19 patients report a wide array of challenges in these domains. As a result, further clinical research is essential to develop patient-centred care strategies and to equip healthcare professionals with the expertise required for effective management of this group of patients.
