PMID: 41664887
Title: Intentions and attitudes of caregivers towards enrolment of their children and adolescents living with HIV into remission trials involving analytic treatment interruption.

Abstract:
The development of approaches and interventions to achieve HIV remission continues to accelerate. Children living with HIV who started antiretroviral therapy (ART) at a young age and sustain viral suppression are an ideal clinical trial population. Trials may require analytic treatment interruptions (ATIs). Paediatric trials depend on the willingness of guardians to consent to child participation, yet there are few data about guardian willingness or attitudes. Here, we investigated the opinions of guardians of children likely to be eligible for ATI trials.
Children and youth who started ART ≤ 3 months of age, and who remained well-controlled on ART older than 7 years, were recruited in South Africa, Mozambique, Uganda, Mali and Thailand. A survey was conducted among guardians of these paediatric participants. The survey utilized a vignette describing a trial with ATI and assessed attitudes and intentions (measured on 7-point scales) of the guardians regarding their children's participation in a hypothetical trial.
Guardians of 99 children were recruited. Guardians' median age was 45 years (range 24-73) and most (89.9%) were female. The median age of the child or youth with HIV was 13.2 years (range 7-18.5 years). Most respondents endorsed a positive intention to enrol their child in a future HIV remission trial (mean 6.5 [SD:1.3] on a 7-point scale), with significant variation across the sites (p = 0.0024). Most respondents strongly endorsed a range of trial benefits, including better future HIV treatments (93.8%) and access to better care (88.0%). Some endorsed concern about the trial burden to themselves (33.3%) and the child (35.4%). Almost half strongly believed that the trial would result in the child no longer needing ART (48%) and the child being cured of HIV (46.5%).
Across multiple countries, guardians of children and youth who were treated early were positive about participation in trials with ATI. Only a third expressed some concern about trial burden, while almost half had unrealistic expectations about potential benefits. Recruitment into trials involving ATI will need to include effective communication strategies to ensure that participants and caregivers are adequately informed about burden, potential risks and the likelihood of personal benefit.
