PMID: 41665697
Title: Experiences and perceptions of cancer patients receiving virtual reality therapy: a meta‑synthesis of qualitative research.

Abstract:
Virtual reality (VR) technology is increasingly being used in supportive care for cancer patients, aiming to improve their discomfort symptoms and enhance their health status and quality of life. Understanding patients' feedback and insights is crucial for improving the application of virtual reality among cancer patients. While numerous qualitative studies have examined the experiences and perspectives of cancer patients during their treatment with virtual reality, a comprehensive synthesis of these insights is missing. This review of qualitative evidence aimed to explore the experiences and perceptions of patients receiving VR therapy in cancer, providing guidance for the treatment and rehabilitation of cancer patients with VR technology.
A computerised search of the Cochrane Library, PubMed, Embase, CINAHL, Web of Science Core Collection, CNKI, Wanfang, Vip and SinoMed was conducted to identify relevant qualitative studies. The enrolled participants were adult patients with cancer who were 18 years of age or older. The search covered the period from establishing each database until May 2025. The Joanna Briggs Institute criteria for qualitative research were utilised to evaluate the quality of the studies. The data included in the literature were analyzed and integrated by "thematic synthesis" to formalize the identification and development of themes.
A total of 12 studies were included, encompassing data from cancer patients with an age range of 20 to 83 years. Findings were integrated into 12 sub-themes and 4 themes: (1) experiences of cancer patients receiving VR therapy. (2) perceived benefits of VR therapy for cancer patients. (3) barriers to VR therapy for cancer patients. (4) needs and expectations of cancer patients receiving VR therapy. Each encompassed sub-themes.
While most patients develop a strong interest in VR therapy and are willing to try it, some cancer patients express doubts and resistance due to poor human-computer interaction experiences, discomfort such as nausea or dizziness, or economic factors. Participants reported that VR therapy may serve as an effective approach to alleviate patients' physical pain, relieve psychological stress, and promote the recovery process. Additionally, cancer patients receiving VR therapy face various barriers and have put forward some needs and preferences to better apply VR therapy. Future studies should be conducted according to patients' feedback and suggestions on how to further optimize and improve VR therapy.
PROSPERO CRD420251053989.
