PMID: 41687664
Title: MIR-29A, MIR-222 AND MIR-132 IN THE BLOOD PLASMA OF PREGNANT WOMEN AS PREDICTORS OF GESTATIONAL DIABETES.
Journal: Georgian medical news
Authors: Lachashvili, L; Khubua, M; Jangavadze, M; Bedinasvili, Z

Abstract:
Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (GDM) is a significant medical problem worldwide and the cause of many complications for the mother and the foetus, in terms of pregnancy management and outcome. Early assessment of the risk of diabetes in pregnant women with hyperglycaemia is particularly important, as it allows timely preventive measures to help avoid potential complications Aim: Our aim was to identify microRNAs that could enable the assessment of diabetes risk in pregnant women with hyperglycaemia.
The study analyzed the expression of the following microRNAs: miR-132, miR-29a, miR-222, miR-93and miR-17-5p, from the blood samples of pregnant women with hyperglycaemia, with gestational diabetes mellitus, with type 1 or type 2 diabetes and healthy pregnant between 24 and 28 weeks of their pregnancy. The miR-17-5p was used as a reference.
A significant difference in the miR-222 and miR-29a expression level was found in plasma samples. Compared to the control group Among pregnant patients with hyperglycaemia miR-222 and miR-29a in some sample exhibit increased levels while others show reduced levels-suggesting its potential for subgroup differentiation within this population. MiR-93 remains uniformly low in in Diabetes, GDM, Hyperglycaemia groups compared to the control group. A significant difference in the miR-93 expression level was found in plasma samples. miR-132 is also upregulated in GDM and diabetic patients, with the highest levels observed in the diabetic group, compared to the control group. In contrast, its expression fluctuates among pregnant women with hyperglycaemia.
The wide variability in the expression levels of miR-29a, miR-222 and miR-132 suggests that they may serve as useful predictive biomarkers for evaluating diabetes risk in hyperglycemic pregnant women. Further studies involving longitudinal follow-up of hyperglycaemic pregnant women are needed to determine the predictive value of these microRNAs.
