PMID: 41671441
Title: Assessing the Content and Quality of Online Patient Education Material on Clinical Trials From NCI-Designated Comprehensive Cancer Centers.
Journal: Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network : JNCCN
Authors: Beard, Trista A; Morales, Diana L; Arshaid, Alena; Desai, Charmi Suchi; Solomon, Welela; Sharief, Aali; Villanueva, Isabella; Sanogo, Fatimata; El-Khoueiry, Anthony B; Stern, Mariana C; Hughes Halbert, Chanita

Abstract:
Online patient educational material (PEM) on cancer clinical trials (CCTs) is an essential resource for patients seeking to learn more about treatment options. Assessing its quality and content themes may lead to improved educational content. Using qualitative analysis, this study examined the quality and content themes of online PEM related to CCTs published by comprehensive cancer centers (CCCs).
A random sample of CCCs (N=21) was chosen to represent the national network of cancer centers. Each website was searched for webpages containing patient-oriented clinical trial information. Official YouTube channels were also searched for relevant video material. Each webpage and video (n=196) was assessed for quality and content themes.
Common content themes in the sample (n=196) of online PEM from CCCs were "purpose of trials," "physician speaker," "animated or illustrated elements," and "phases of trials." Online PEM had an average score of 83 for understandability and 26 for actionability, an area noted for improvement (high quality scores for the Patient Education Materials Assessment Tool [PEMAT] are >70). Online webpages that mixed text and video scored highest on the quality assessment, whereas video-only content scored lowest. Only a small percentage of PEM included FAQs (10%), instructions on how to find a trial (16%), mentioned consent (14%), or costs associated with trials (12%). Mentions or depictions of minority populations were not commonly observed in the material (11%).
Cancer centers should add various audiovisual formats and patient-centered resource tools (eg, planning kit, question guide) to their clinical trial webpages to increase the quality of the educational resources. Including representation of historically underserved populations and adding actionable advice can potentially engage and empower patients to consider trials as part of their care plan, and thereby increase enrollment in CCTs.
