PMID: 41671451
Title: From Diagnosis, Therapy Decision-Making to Genetic Risk Assessment: The Impact of ctDNA Testing on Comprehensive Cancer Management-A Case Report.
Journal: Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network : JNCCN
Authors: Kanwar, Nisha; Seyi, Abidoye B; Tan, Nelly; Rojas, Carlos; Ernani, Vinicius; Rumilla, Kandelaria M; Borad, Mitesh J; Zheng, Gang

Abstract:
Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) testing is a minimally invasive alternative to tissue biopsy and is ideal for inaccessible tumors or limited samples. It captures tumor heterogeneity over time and different anatomic locations, unlike the static snapshot provided by a biopsy. In this report, we describe a 68-year-old female with an initial diagnosis of metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma (a pancreas head mass with multiple bilateral lung nodules). Mutation profiling of the pancreatic mass biopsy using a comprehensive cancer next-generation sequencing (NGS) panel was unsuccessful due to insufficient tissue. Consequently, ctDNA testing using a pan-cancer NGS panel was performed, and an EGFR p.L858R variant at 2.15% was identified. Interestingly, this activating variant is highly specific to non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), which raised the possibility of a synchronous tumor unrelated to the pancreatic mass. Immunohistochemistry showed the EGFR variant in station 7 lymph nodes but not in pancreatic biopsy tissue, supporting the inference that the variant originated from the lung mass. Droplet digital PCR on the limited pancreatic biopsy identified a KRAS p.Q61 variant, which was absent by ctDNA testing, suggesting a pancreatic primary with low ctDNA levels. In addition to diagnosing a primary lung cancer, ctDNA testing guided treatment decisions. With a primary EGFR p.L858R-mutant NSCLC, osimertinib was administered, resulting in a partial response within 10 months. In addition, given the synchronous primary pancreatic adenocarcinoma, germline testing was performed, revealing a CDKN2A p.I49T variant consistent with melanoma-pancreatic cancer syndrome, prompting comprehensive cancer surveillance and familial testing. This case illustrates how ctDNA testing enabled a comprehensive evaluation by clarifying the diagnosis, identifying actionable biomarkers, and facilitating genetic risk assessment, ultimately having a significant impact on the patient's clinical management.
