PMID: 41685619
Title: Perceptions of ischaemic heart disease risk among Indian migrants in Australia: a qualitative study.

Abstract:
Ischaemic heart disease (IHD) is a global health issue, with people of Indian origin facing earlier onset and more severe cases, leading to higher mortality at younger ages compared to Western countries. Indian migrants maintain similar risks post-migration. Managing modifiable risk factors and improving risk knowledge and health-seeking behaviours are essential, but research on IHD risk perceptions among Indian migrants is limited.
This study explores how first-generation Indian migrants perceive their IHD risk and the factors influencing these perceptions.
As a component of a mixed- method study, a qualitative descriptive study design was employed to examine study participants perception of their IHD risk and the influencing factors. Semi-structured interviews were conducted with Indian migrants residing in metropolitan Melbourne, Victoria using multiple Indian languages and English. Data were analysed in the original language, with findings reported in English. NVivo software was used for data management and analysis. A qualitative content analysis was conducted using a hybrid coding approach where the main categories were developed deductively and subcategories were developed inductively from the data.
Twenty interviews were conducted with participants aged 32 to 70, 55% of whom were female, with an average stay in Australia of 11.2 years. The main themes included: perceptions shaped by personal experiences, especially family history, with most underestimating their risk; migration, cultural norms, and time constraints hindering behaviour change; family support, religious beliefs, and longevity aspirations motivating healthier behaviours; and limited primary healthcare engagement and culturally appropriate health resources. These results are discussed within the context of Capability, Opportunity and Motivation model of behaviour change (COM-B).
The study highlights key factors influencing IHD risk perceptions among Indian migrants. By understanding these specific risk perceptions and cultural nuances, healthcare professionals can develop and implement more effective, culturally sensitive health promotion and disease prevention strategies. This tailored approach can lead to better patient outcomes and a more equitable healthcare system.
