PMID: 41688103
Title: Development of a resource use measure to capture costs related to unpaid care for people living with non-memory led dementia: a modified Delphi study.

Abstract:
To determine the personal, National Health Service and wider societal resource use in relation to caring responsibilities for carers of people living with non-memory led dementias (NMLDs); and to design a resource use measure (RUM) that can be delivered in the Better Living with Non-memory-led Dementia (BELIDE) randomised controlled trial, part of the Rare Dementia (RD) - TALK research programme.
The first stage was to identify and review any existing RUMs that could be used or adapted to the trial population and setting. If no measures were identified, the second stage was initial informal discussions with healthcare professionals (HCPs) and the programme patient and public involvement representatives to inform the perspective, settings of care and main resource items to develop a new RUM. In the third stage, a first draft of the RUM was tested for content and face validity in a modified Delphi study comprising HCPs and carers. The measure was revised and, in the final stage, piloted in the first 3 months of the BELIDE trial to assess acceptability and feasibility of collecting the economic outcomes and the completeness of data collection. The key drivers of resource use and costs were assessed, and appropriate face validity checks were applied to ensure accurate description of the treatment pathways.
Carers and family of people living with NMLD recruited from Rare Dementia Support members in the UK, and a broad range of HCPs with experience of working with people who have NMLD to capture the different dimensions of experience, grade and skill mix.
In total, 20 people participated in the modified Delphi study, 11 HCPs and 9 carers. Rare Dementia Support groups and 1:1 calls were highly rated, as were general practitioner appointments. The greatest consensus was in the productivity and carer tasks; all caring tasks were highly rated. Healthcare practitioners rated healthcare items as higher importance than carers themselves.
Unpaid carers and HCPs are the experts in the resource impact of caring for someone with NMLD and have been underserved in research to date. This research, as part of preparatory stages of the BELIDE trial, has enabled the timely development of a comprehensive and valid RUM for unpaid carers of people with NMLD.
CRD42022356943.
NCT06241287.
