PMID: 41673315
Title: What are the effects of pilates and dance on upper limb functionality in women post-breast cancer surgery? a randomized three-arm clinical trial.
Journal: Supportive care in cancer : official journal of the Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer
Authors: Boing, Leonessa; de Bem Fretta, Tatiana; Dias, Mirella; Marinho, Alcyane; Lynch, Brigid; Bergmann, Anke; da Silveira, Juliana; Groth, Larissa Altenhofen; de Azevedo Guimarães, Adriana Coutinho

Abstract:
To evaluate the short-term (16 weeks post-intervention) and long-term effects (six- and 12-month follow-up) of two physical exercise interventions-Mat Pilates or belly dance-compared with a control group on lymphedema, range of motion, isometric strength, proprioception, and upper-limb symmetry in women who have undergone unilateral breast cancer surgery and are receiving hormone therapy.
Sixty-nine women who underwent unilateral breast cancer surgery were randomized into three groups: Mat Pilates, belly dance, and control. The Mat Pilates and belly dance groups participated in supervised exercise sessions three times per week, lasting 60 min each, for 16 weeks. The control group continued their usual daily activities and attended three educational lectures. The outcomes assessed included upper-limb functionality (DASH), lymphedema (arm volume), range of motion (digital goniometer), isometric strength (dynamometer), and limb symmetry (difference between the contralateral and homolateral limbs).
In the Mat Pilates group, post-intervention effects were observed in increased range of motion (p = 0.026), improved isometric strength (p = 0.001), and enhanced strength symmetry between limbs (p = 0.034). In the belly dance group, post-intervention improvements were identified in upper-limb functionality (p = 0.001), lymphedema (p = 0.017), isometric strength (p = 0.001), and symmetry of both range of motion (p = 0.041) and strength between limbs (p = 0.009). However, none of these gains were sustained at follow-up assessments. No significant intragroup changes were observed in the control group.
Mat Pilates and belly dance were effective in improving upper-limb functionality, range of motion, lymphedema, isometric strength, and limb symmetry in breast cancer women undergoing hormone therapy. Both forms of physical exercise may be recommended by professionals involved in oncological rehabilitation.
ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03194997) Registration June 20, 2017.
