PMID: 41686362
Title: The impact of DXA findings on general practitioners' decision regarding first-line oral bisphosphonates in postmenopausal osteoporosis-data from French General Practice (the IMOGENE study).
Journal: Archives of osteoporosis
Authors: Cortet, Bernard; Chelbani, Leila; Garot, Térésa; Samama, Pascale; Lespessailles, Eric

Abstract:
In our real-world study of women with postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMO), general practitioners (GPs) adhered to French guidelines on stopping, changing, or continuing oral bisphosphonates in 60% of cases and adhered to guidelines on initiating oral BPs in only 39%. These findings highlight the need to educate GPs on PMO treatment recommendations.
French guidelines for postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMO) recommend dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) assessment of bone mineral density (BMD) to guide treatment decisions. However, data reporting implementation of these guidelines in general practice is lacking. Our study assessed general practitioners' (GPs') use of DXA results to guide decisions regarding first-line oral bisphosphonate (oBP) treatment in women with PMO.
In this multicenter cohort study, participating GPs enrolled women with PMO who had been receiving the first-line bisphosphonates for 2-5 years, had a reference (baseline) DXA in the 2 years pre-enrolment or ≤ 2 years prior to BP initiation, and agreed to a follow-up DXA. GPs prescribed a follow-up DXA to guide their decision to stop, continue, or change BPs. We checked the GPs' decision for concordance with national treatment guidelines.
From January 2018 to November 2019, 23 GPs enrolled 99 women meeting the inclusion criteria. Based on follow-up DXA, the decision to stop, change, or continue oBPs aligned with guidelines in 60% of cases. Agreement was higher in women receiving oBPs for < 3 vs ≥ 3 years (70.2% vs 54.3%). Based on baseline DXA, the decision to initiate treatment was aligned in only 39% of cases, with the follow-up treatment decision aligned with guidelines in 72% of these cases. The consistency of treatment decision between GPs and the scientific committee was weak (kappa coefficient of 0.295).
Our study suggests insufficient awareness of national recommendations for PMO treatment in French general practice, highlighting the need for stronger GP education.
