PMID: 41683720
Title: Cellular and Molecular Changes Induced by Various Preservation Temperatures and Methods of Preservation in Renal Grafts and Other Solid Organ Grafts.
Journal: International journal of molecular sciences
Authors: Shamma, Talal; England, Cora; Ortas, Tamara S; Ali, Hasan; Dugbartey, George J; Sener, Alp

Abstract:
Kidney transplantation remains the ultimate treatment option for patients with end-stage renal disease. However, the global shortage in donor kidneys, exacerbated by challenges such as ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI), reduces renal graft viability and negatively impacts post-transplant outcomes. Static cold storage, the gold standard of organ preservation, reduces metabolic demand but increases the risk of cold-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and IRI, especially in marginal kidneys. The introduction of machine perfusion techniques allows renal grafts and other solid organ grafts to be preserved at a wider range of temperatures. Organ preservation temperatures play an important role in determining post-transplant outcomes in the transplantation of the kidney and other transplantable solid organs. Therefore, determining the optimal preservation temperature may help increase organ utilization by avoiding unnecessary graft discards and increasing the safe use of marginal organs. This review discusses the impact of various preservation temperatures and methods of preservation on post-transplant outcomes in renal grafts and other organ grafts. Drawing from preclinical, clinical, and meta-analytic studies, we compare hypothermic (0-4 °C), moderate hypothermic (10 °C), subnormothermic (20-32 °C), normothermic (35-37 °C), and subzero preservation strategies, and cellular and molecular changes that occur in renal grafts and other solid organ grafts during preservation at these temperatures. Overall, temperature-controlled machine perfusion outperforms static preservation of renal grafts and other solid organ grafts from marginal and deceased donors, potentially expanding donor pools and improving long-term graft survival, and suggests the need for future research to determine optimal preservation temperature for renal grafts and other solid organ grafts to improve viability and post-transplant outcomes.
