PMID: 41689216
Title: Linking everyday physical activity and capacity tests using wearable and mobile technologies in older adults and cardiac cohorts: protocol for a pilot observational study.

Abstract:
This study investigates the potential of digital health technologies (DHTs), such as wearable devices and smartphones, to complement traditional submaximal functional capacity tests, such as the 6 min walk test (6MWT) and the timed up and go test (TUG). While these traditional tests are widely used due to their simplicity and relevance to daily living activities, they have limitations, including infrequent administration and the need for clinical observation. DHT offers continuous, real-world monitoring, which may accurately reflect patients' health status and effectively inform clinical decisions. However, there is a need to establish the validity of the data and metrics computed through DHT and understand patient perspectives on using such technology.
This is an observational pilot study (Synergy Digital Health study) that aims at linking wearable data with traditional test outcomes and assessing participants' acceptance and usage of such DHT. A cohort of 30 cardiovascular patients from Oxford University Hospitals, UK, and 30 community-dwelling elderly people from social centres in Helsingborg, Sweden, will use wearable devices for 2 months in free-living conditions, they will fill out technology acceptance questionnaires (AQs), have baseline assessments and perform physical tests such as the 6MWT and TUG using the Mobistudy smartphone app. Subgroups will participate in codesign workshops to identify experience-based design recommendations for the technology. Quantitative and qualitative methods will be adopted to analyse the collected data.
The study protocol received ethical approval in Sweden from the Etikprövningsmyndigheten (2024-04886-01) and in the UK from the National Health Service (NHS) Research Ethics Committees (Iras project ID: 340870), in accordance with local regulations. All participants are asked for written informed consent. The results of the study will be shared via scientific journals and conferences.
