PMID: 41683769
Title: Extracellular Vesicle-Derived MicroRNAs' Value in Diagnosing and Predicting Clinical Outcomes in Patients with COVID-19 and Bacterial Sepsis.
Journal: International journal of molecular sciences
Authors: Schiavello, Martina; Vizio, Barbara; Bosco, Ornella; Dini, Chiara; Gennaro, Barbara; Trost, Anna; Greco, Elisabetta; Randazzo, Salvatore Andrea; Pivetta, Emanuele; Mengozzi, Giulio; Montrucchio, Giuseppe; Morello, Fulvio; Lupia, Enrico

Abstract:
Severe COVID-19 and bacterial sepsis share clinical manifestations of systemic inflammation and organ dysfunction. Yet, early differentiation between these conditions and timely identification of patients at risk of deterioration remain major clinical challenges. Extracellular vesicle (EV)-associated microRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged as promising biomarkers of host immune dysregulation. In our study, we have characterized circulating EV-miRNAs in patients with COVID-19, bacterial sepsis, localized bacterial infections, and healthy subjects to assess their diagnostic and prognostic utility. After EV isolation from plasma and characterization by nanoparticle tracking analysis and flow cytometry, a panel of 12 inflammation-related miRNAs were individually quantified by qRT-PCR. Four EV-miRNAs-miR-28-5p, miR-199a-5p, miR-200a-3p, and miR-369-3p-were significantly elevated in COVID-19 patients, with higher levels in those with poor prognosis. miR-199a-5p and miR-200a-3p were increased in bacterial sepsis compared with COVID-19, enabling discrimination between viral and bacterial sepsis. Three EV-miRNAs-miR-28-5p, miR-199a-5p, and miR-200a-3p-were markedly higher in bacterial sepsis than localized infections, and ROC analysis showed a strong diagnostic performance, particularly for miR-199a-5p, alone or in combination with other EV-miRNAs. The increased expression of selected EV-miRNAs was associated with higher SOFA scores and in-hospital mortality. These findings indicate that EV-miRNAs reflect pathogen-specific and severity-related immune responses, supporting their potential as minimally invasive biomarkers for early diagnosis and risk stratification in severe infections.
