PMID: 41671552
Title: The Longevity of Mobile Apps for Cancer Recovery: Scoping Review.

Abstract:
The number of cancer survivors is steadily increasing worldwide, leading to an increased demand for long-term follow-up and supportive care. Many survivors face ongoing physical and psychosocial issues that highlight the need for innovative management approaches. Mobile health apps offer potential benefits by facilitating patient-led follow-up, self-management, and more efficient use of health care resources. Although the market for cancer-related mobile apps has grown rapidly, their sustainability and scientific basis remain unclear. In the European Union, the Medical Device Regulation (MDR), in effect since May 2021, introduced stricter criteria for classifying medical devices, including certain software apps. While aiming to improve patient safety, the MDR could pose challenges for small companies and academic developers, potentially limiting the availability of such apps. No scoping review has delineated changes in active apps before and after implementation of the legislation regulating medical devices.
This scoping review aimed to evaluate the current availability and longevity of English-language mobile apps supporting cancer recovery, with a specific focus on changes before and after the implementation of the European Union MDR, and to assess the extent to which these apps are supported by clinical evidence.
Searches were conducted in mobile app stores (Apple's App Store and Google Play) and literature databases (MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane Library, and Web of Science), using predefined terms. Mobile apps targeting cancer recovery and published articles on their effectiveness were included. Two reviewers independently extracted data. A descriptive analysis was conducted to report trends in mobile device app availability and updates over time.
A total of 151 mobile apps were identified in 2018. However, by 2024, only 45 of 151 (30%) were still available. Among these, 25 of 151 (17%) were updated within the past 2 years. During the search in December 2024, 1 new mobile app supported by scientific evidence was discovered. This mobile app was developed to assist cancer survivors in managing insomnia through cognitive behavioral therapy. Rapid turnover and a potential lack of sustainability in the mobile health app market for cancer survivors were evident, with most mobile apps identified in 2018 no longer available by 2024.
This review revealed a limited number of publicly available mobile apps that support cancer recovery. The longevity of existing mobile apps is limited, potentially because of regulatory and financial barriers. Prioritizing rigorous effectiveness trials, addressing implementation barriers, and developing sustainable business models are essential to ensure the long-term availability and success of mobile health apps in cancer survivorship care.
