PMID: 41683839
Title: Audiovestibular Dysfunction Related to Long COVID-19 Syndrome: A Systematic Review of Characteristics, Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Management.
Journal: International journal of molecular sciences
Authors: Chen, Jiann-Jy; Hsu, Chih-Wei; Wang, Hung-Yu; Stubbs, Brendon; Chen, Tien-Yu; Liang, Chih-Sung; Chen, Yen-Wen; Zeng, Bing-Syuan; Tseng, Ping-Tao

Abstract:
Long COVID-19 syndrome (or so-called post-COVID-19) is indicated by miscellaneous symptoms, usually starting 3 months from the COVID-19 infection and lasting for at least 2 months, which cannot be explained by an alternative diagnosis. There has been more and more reports addressing the audiovestibular dysfunction related to long COVID-19 syndrome. Emerging evidence suggests that the linkage between audiovestibular dysfunction and long COVID-19 syndrome might rely on (a) direct inner ear system damage related to viral invasion and consequent inflammation, (b) micro thromboembolic events, which might result from the COVID-19-induced autoimmune reaction against endothelial cells, and consequent transient-ischemia and hypoxia of the auditory pathways, (c) the disturbed nerve conduction in vestibulocochlear nerves due to viral invasion, and finally (d) altered auditory cortex function, either imbalanced central gain or neurotransmitter disturbance. However, most of the aforementioned mechanism remained hypothetic and still needed further studies to approve or refute. This systematic review synthesizes current evidence on the characteristics, pathophysiology, diagnostic approaches, and management of audiovestibular dysfunction related to long COVID-19 syndrome. Literature searches across PubMed, Embase, ClinicalKey, Web of Science, and ScienceDirect (up to 15 December 2025) were conducted in accordance with PRISMA guidelines. Through this systematic review, we provided a schematic diagram of the physiopathology of long COVID-19 syndrome-related audiovestibular dysfunction. Further, we summarized the currently available diagnostic tools to explore the audiovestibular function in such patients. The currently available treatment, either pharmacotherapy or nonpharmacotherapy, mainly tackles idiopathic audiovestibular dysfunction but not specifically long COVID-19 syndrome-related audiovestibular dysfunction. Timely recognition and intervention may prevent progression to permanent hearing loss or vestibular disability, improving quality of life. Trial registration: PROSPERO CRD420251265741.
