PMID: 41664652
Title: A network meta-analysis of interventions for anxiety and depression in PCOS.

Abstract:
The study aimed to provide evidence to support optimal interventions for alleviating anxiety and depression symptoms in patients with polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) through a systematic review and network meta-analysis.
A comprehensive literature search of PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library, and Web of Science from their inceptions to January 2, 2025 was performed. The criteria for inclusion defined were as follows: (1) The study population consisted of female PCOS patients; (2) interventions included psychological therapy, exercise, drug treatment, or digital intervention; (3) studies that reported changes in anxiety and depression scores; and (4) randomized controlled trials (RCTs). Two reviewers independently screened the literature and extracted the data. Disagreements were resolved by consulting a third party. Standardized mean difference (SMD) was used for data recording in this study. The analysis of data was carried out based on a random-effects model, while network meta-analysis was implemented through R 4.4.0 and Just Another Gibbs Sampler (JAGS) 4.3.1. We conducted a Bayesian random-effects network meta-analysis (NMA) and ranked interventions using the surface under the cumulative ranking curve (SUCRA).
This study included a total of 25 RCTs, involving 1,453 female PCOS patients, to evaluate the effects of various interventions in alleviating anxiety and depression symptoms. Effective interventions included emotion-focused therapy (EFT), peer support (PS), omega-3 plus vitamin E (O3+VE), and mindfulness stress management (MSM). Other interventions, such as metformin and vitamin D plus probiotics (VD+Pro), showed no significant benefit compared with control. Data on PS for anxiety were not analyzed in the present network meta-analysis because relevant trials could not be connected within the network structure.
Our study demonstrates that EFT and PS emerge as promising interventions in alleviating anxiety and depression symptoms in PCOS patients. Interventions such as O3+VE and MSM also showed potential in improving emotional states.<b>Review registration:</b> PROSPERO CRD420250655513.
