PMID: 41667185
Title: Barriers to and enablers of prophylactic compression use by people at risk of venous leg ulcer recurrence: a qualitative study.

Abstract:
Venous leg ulcers (VLUs) are complex, chronic wounds that often recur after healing. The ongoing use of compression hosiery is the primary strategy to reduce the risk of VLU recurrence. However, adherence to this prophylactic treatment is low, undermining treatment effectiveness and placing a substantial burden on individuals with a history of VLUs and on healthcare systems. Understanding the factors influencing people's adherence to compression hosiery for secondary VLU prevention is essential to support approaches to promote uptake.
The study aimed to (1) draw on the Capabilities, Opportunities and Motivations of Behaviour (COM-B) model and the Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) to explore factors influencing individuals' use of prophylactic compression hosiery for the secondary prevention of VLUs and (2) use the behaviour change wheel to identify intervention strategies to support the ongoing use of prophylactic compression hosiery by individuals after VLU healing.
A descriptive, interpretive qualitative study involving individuals with a history of healed VLUs. Semistructured interviews were conducted with people who had experienced healed VLUs. The interviews were guided by the COM-B model. Framework analysis was conducted using deductive coding informed by the TDF and inductive coding to capture emerging themes linked to barriers to and enablers of the target behaviour (ongoing compression use). Data management was aided by NVivo software, and coding was conducted by two researchers.
Interventions were conducted in person, by telephone or online, based on participants' preferences, at community leg clubs or in their homes, from April 2024 to January 2025.
Participants with experience of healed VLUs were recruited from three National Health Service (NHS) trusts and community leg clubs in the North of England.
A total of 15 participants were interviewed, comprising 4 males and 11 females aged between 49 and 89 years. Our analysis identified six factors that may influence individuals' use of prophylactic compression hosiery following VLU healing: knowledge, skills, environmental context and resources, emotion, social influences and beliefs about consequences. Deficits in knowledge, skills and resources, such as limited availability of prophylactic compression sizes, delays in prophylactic compression delivery and limited access to NHS services after healing, were primary barriers to people's use of compression hosiery in this context. Conversely, positive beliefs about the benefits of ongoing use of prophylactic compression hosiery were a strong enabler. Emotion and social influences were identified as both barriers and enablers: fear of recurrence and social support encouraged adherence, while stigma and negative feelings hindered it. We identified six intervention functions (education, training, persuasion, environmental restructuring, modelling and enablement) and eight linked behaviour change techniques that could be explored further to support people's ongoing use of prophylactic compression therapy. These techniques include providing information about antecedents, discussing health and emotional consequences, instruction, demonstration, rehearsal, social support, framing/reframing and vicarious reinforcement.
The identified intervention functions and behaviour change techniques provide theoretically informed insights for designing interventions to support sustained use of prophylactic compression hosiery following VLU healing. Key barriers to address include addressing gaps in individuals' knowledge about prophylactic compression therapy, prioritising posthealing VLU services, ensuring timely access to appropriately fitted compression and enhancing social support networks.
