PMID: 41682533
Title: Integrating EEG Sensors with Virtual Reality to Support Students with ADHD.
Journal: Sensors (Basel, Switzerland)
Authors: Wolfers, Juriaan; Hurst, William; Krampe, Caspar

Abstract:
Students with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) face a continuous challenge with their attention span, putting them at a greater risk of academic or psychological difficulties compared to their peers. Innovative communication technologies are demonstrating potential to address these attention-span concerns. Virtual Reality (VR) is one such example, and has the potential to address attention-span difficulties among ADHD students. Accordingly, this study presents an EEG-based multimodal sensing pipeline as a methodological contribution, focusing on sensor-based data acquisition, signal processing, and neurophysiological interpretation to assess attention in VR-based environments, simulating a university supply chain educational topic. Thus, in this paper, a sequential exploratory approach investigated how 35 participants experienced an interactive VR-learning-driven supply chain game. A Brain-Computer Interaction (BCI) sensor generated insights by quantitatively analysing electroencephalogram (EEG) data that were processed through the proposed pipeline and integrated with subjective measures to validate participant's subjective feelings. These insights originated from questions during the experiment that followed the Spatial Presence and Technology Acceptance Model to form a multimodal assessment framework. Findings demonstrated that the experimental group experienced a higher improved attention, concentration, engagement, and focus levels compared to the control group. BCI results from the experimental group showed more dominant voltage potentials in the right frontal and prefrontal cortex of the brain in areas responsible for attention, memory, and decision-making. A high acceptance of the VR technology among neurodiverse students highlights the added benefits of multimodal learning assessment methods in an educational setting.
