PMID: 41671454
Title: Excision With Total Margin Control Versus Vertical Section Margin Assessment for NCCN Very High-Risk Cutaneous Squamous Cell Carcinoma.
Journal: Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network : JNCCN
Authors: Wang, David M; Ran, Nina A; Granger, Emily E; Koyfman, Shlomo; Vidimos, Allison; Wysong, Ashley; Carr, David R; Shahwan, Kathryn T; Hirotsu, Kelsey E; Carucci, John A; Carter, Joi B; Cañueto, Javier; Girardi, Fabio M; Mangold, Aaron R; Srivastava, Divya; Nijhawan, Rajiv I; Brodland, David G; Zitelli, John A; Willenbrink, Tyler J; Ruiz, Emily S

Abstract:
Among the 1.5 million cases of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) diagnosed annually in the United States, a subset of aggressive tumors recur or metastasize. Treatment options include total margin-controlled surgery, such as Mohs micrographic surgery or other forms of peripheral and deep en face margin assessment (MMS/PDEMA), and standard excision with postoperative vertical section margin assessment (SEVMA). NCCN Guidelines recommend MMS/PDEMA for the management of cSCC classified as very high risk based on NCCN risk stratification criteria. This study aims to validate the recommendation of MMS/PDEMA as the preferred surgical approach for NCCN very high-risk cSCCs, using data from a multicenter, multinational cohort.
A multicenter cohort study was conducted across 12 sites, including 10 in the United States, 1 in Spain, and 1 in Brazil, comprising 2,752 primary NCCN very high-risk cSCCs treated with MMS/PDEMA or SEVMA. Propensity score-weighted analysis was used to balance baseline characteristics. Outcomes included local recurrence (LR), nodal metastasis (NM), distant metastasis (DM), and disease-specific death (DSD).
After balancing baseline characteristics, SEVMA was associated with a 2-fold higher rate of poor outcomes, including recurrence, metastasis, and DSD, compared with MMS/PDEMA. The 3-year cumulative incidence of poor outcomes was higher for SEVMA: LR (12.5% vs 5.9%), NM (11.6% vs 6.0%), DM (4.3% vs 1.9%), and DSD (6.2% vs 3.3%).
This study supports the NCCN recommendation of MMS/PDEMA for NCCN very high-risk cSCC, showing reduced recurrence, metastasis, and cSCC-specific mortality compared with SEVMA.
