PMID: 41683218
Title: Nutrition Assistance Programs and Pediatric Weight Outcomes: A Systematic Review.
Journal: Nutrients
Authors: Ferris, Dan; Davison, Genevieve; Frank, Tyler; Gilbert, Amanda; Thomas, Fanice; Rothman, Sydney; Lipsey, Kim; Moreland-Russell, Sarah

Abstract:
Food insecurity and pediatric obesity have increased concurrently in the U.S., raising questions about the role of Federal Nutrition Assistance Programs (FNAPs) in shaping weight outcomes. This systematic review examined evidence on relationships between FNAP participation and pediatric weight outcomes.
Six databases were searched for U.S.-based, peer-reviewed studies published through July 2024 that assessed FNAP participation and pediatric weight outcomes.
Seventy-five studies met the inclusion criteria, and no consistent pattern indicated that any single FNAP or program type (educational setting-based or direct financial support) reliably reduced or increased childhood overweight or obesity risk. Twenty studies found statistically significant beneficial relationships between FNAP participation and pediatric weight outcomes. Most studies reported mixed findings (<i>n</i> = 32), typically varying by subgroup (e.g., age, grade level, gender, race or ethnicity, or program characteristics). Sixteen studies found no relationship between participation and weight. Seven studies found an adverse relationship. Most studies relied on non-randomized quantitative designs and secondary data, and adverse findings were more common in lower quality studies. Among 18 studies that evaluated the effects of policy changes (e.g., the Healthy Hunger-Free Kids Act (2010), 2009 WIC package change), nearly all identified associations between the policy change and weight outcomes, with eight beneficial and nine reporting mixed results.
The findings indicate a complex non-causal relationship between FNAP participation and weight that varies across populations, programs, and study designs. Overall, evidence does not support broad adverse weight effects of FNAPs, and policy changes that strengthen nutrition standards may contribute to healthier weight outcomes. These findings have implications for nutrition policy, program design, and future research.
