PMID: 41677777
Title: Psychometric properties of the Community Balance and Mobility Scale for people with stroke.

Abstract:
Community Balance and Mobility Scale (CB&M) is a comprehensive performance-based measure developed to assess functional balance and mobility. It represents a potential balance assessment tool for higher functioning stroke survivors.
The aim of this study was to investigate the psychometric property of CB&M in people with stroke.
A methodological study evaluating the psychometric properties.
The setting of the study was a university-based rehabilitation center.
Sixty people with stroke and thirty healthy older adults were included in this study.
Participants were recruited from community and assessed using CB&M and other well-established scales. Statistical analyses included descriptive statistics, 7-day test-retest reliability, inter-rater reliability and construct validity testing and receiver operating characteristic curve analysis.
The CB&M demonstrated excellent internal consistency (Cronbach's α=0.943), inter-rater reliability (intraclass correlation coefficient = 0.992), and test-retest reliability (intraclass correlation coefficient = 0.983). The CB&M Score showed good to excellent correlations with the Berg Balance Scale (r=0.880, P<0.001) and 10-Metre Walk Test at maximum speed (r=-0.763, P<0.001), significant positive correlations with the Fugl-Meyer Assessment, ankle dorsiflexor strength on the affected side, and components of limits of stability test (r=0.341 - 0.631, P<0.01); and significant negative correlations with reaction time in limits of stability test, 10-Metre Walk Test at usual speed, Timed Up and Go test, and the routine activities domain of the questionnaire (r=-0.283 - -0.715, P<0.05). Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis revealed that a cutoff score of 62 could distinguish balance performance (area under the curve = 0.966) with high sensitivity (90.0%) and specificity (95.0%).
The CB&M is a reliable, valid, sensitive, and specific clinical performance measure for evaluating balance ability in individuals with stroke aged 55 years or above.
Clinicians can use this tool to efficiently detect subtle balance and mobility deficits in higher-functioning stroke survivors. It can help clinicians identify those at risk for community mobility limitations and guide targeted rehabilitation to enhance community participation.
