PMID: 41668753
Title: Deep cervical lymph node analysis in central nervous system inflammatory disease.

Abstract:
A previously espoused notion that the brain is an immune-privileged organ has been challenged by evidence of bidirectional communication between the central nervous system and the periphery. A well-described "glymphatic" system in the brain and the meningeal lymphatic system serve as conduits through which antigens, immune cells, and metabolic waste travel from the brain to the deep cervical lymph nodes. These nodes, which are more than passive drainage points, serve as locales where dendritic cells, T cells, and B cells interact with central nervous system-derived signals and modulate immune responses that can influence the brain itself. Disruption of clearance mechanisms to deep cervical nodes-due to intracranial vascular disease, aging, poor sleep, chronic inflammation, or other etiologies-may lead to immune dysregulation. Abnormalities in lymphatic drainage can also alter the presentation of antigens from the central nervous system, affect lymphocyte trafficking, and contribute to the aggregation of proteins like β-amyloid, tau, and α-synuclein. This review synthesizes current knowledge on glymphatic and meningeal lymphatic anatomy and function, highlights how impaired drainage contributes to disorders including multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer disease, and Parkinson disease, and discusses the emerging role of deep cervical lymph node imaging and immunophenotyping in assessing neuroinflammation. Finally, we consider how modulation of meningeal lymphatic and nodal function, through pharmacologic or physical interventions, may impair or restore drainage and alter the course of disease in various ways. The integration of advanced imaging with immunological analysis ultimately may enhance the diagnosis, monitoring, and treatment of neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases. We propose that deep cervical lymph nodes represent an understudied locale, and, potentially, a therapeutic target for peripheral interventions to influence brain disease trajectories.
