PMID: 41689385
Title: Qualitative analysis of out-of-hospital self-management capabilities and ongoing care needs in patients with gynecological malignancies and venous thromboembolism.

Abstract:
Postoperative patients with gynecological malignant tumors are prone to venous thromboembolism (VTE) due to hypercoagulability and limited mobility, and lack of professional guidance after discharge, further increasing the risk of VTE occurrence. Therefore, this study focuses on the current status of self-management ability and continuity of care needs of patients after discharge, aiming to clarify the practical difficulties of prevention activities such as limb activity and symptom recognition in the home environment, in order to improve the implementation and compliance of VTE prevention measures for patients outside the hospital.
Utilizing a phenomenological approach within qualitative research, interview outlines were developed through a comprehensive literature review and expert consultations. The interviewees were selected from 10 patients with gynecological malignant tumors who underwent chemotherapy in our department within 3 months after surgery. The interview method is semi-structured and in-depth qualitative interviews. Data were transcribed, coded, refined, and analyzed utilizing the Colaizzi phenomenological 7-step analysis method.
The self-management abilities for out-of-hospital VTE prevention among patients with gynecological malignancies were categorized into five themes: inadequate VTE risk perception, low self-efficacy in VTE prevention, limited interest in VTE-related information, insufficient VTE prevention education and awareness efforts by healthcare providers, and restricted access to VTE prevention resources. Ongoing care needs were identified into two primary areas: a desire for diverse VTE prevention educational materials and support from families and relatives.
Significant challenges persist in the out-of-hospital self-management and ongoing care of VTE among patients with gynecological malignancies. To address these issues, healthcare providers must develop effective strategies to enhance self-management, optimize continuous care services, and provide comprehensive information resources and social support. These interventions aim to improve patient adherence to VTE prevention measures and enhance their efficacy.
