PMID: 41672624
Title: [Design of Single-Use Duodenoscope Image Processing System].
Journal: Zhongguo yi liao qi xie za zhi = Chinese journal of medical instrumentation
Authors: Wang, Xukai

Abstract:
To design a single-use duodenoscope image processing system that reduces the cost of duodenoscopes while ensuring high-definition (HD) imaging. After use, the system eliminates the need to clean and sterilize the duodenoscope, thereby effectively eliminating the risk of cross-infection.
A single-use duodenoscope image processing system was designed, comprising a single-use duodenoscope, single-use optical fiber, and image processor. The single-use duodenoscope consists of a sequentially connected HD camera module, emission light path preprocessing module, light path emission module, and key module. The HD camera module is used to acquire HD image data, the emission light path preprocessing module converts the image data into electrical signals, and the light path emission module transforms the image electrical signals into optical signals and transmits them to the image processor <i>via</i> a single-use optical fiber. The single-use duodenoscope is made of low-cost medical plastic; key components such as the camera module adopt low-cost CMOS image sensors, the illumination at the scope tip uses ultra-microscopic, ultra-low-power, low-cost LEDs, and HD images are transmitted <i>via</i> low-cost single-use optical fibers instead of expensive amplification circuits, significantly reducing the duodenoscope cost. The reusable image processor consists of sequentially connected light path receiving module, receiving light path preprocessing module, HD image processing module, control module, and display module. The light path receiving module receives image optical signals and converts them into electrical signals, the receiving light path preprocessing module converts the image electrical signals into data signals, the HD image processing module processes the HD images, the control module coordinates and controls system operation, and the display module displays the HD images. The system was subjected to <i>in vitro</i> tests and prototype tests.
<i>In vitro</i> test results showed that the single-use duodenoscope image processing system meets the requirements for clinical application. Clinical trial results demonstrated that the HD images of the pharyngeal, gastric, and duodenal models are clear with realistic color reproduction.
The single-use duodenoscope image processing system can overcome the shortcomings of existing reusable duodenoscopes, which are difficult to sterilize and clean and more prone to cross-infection. Its image quality can also achieve the HD standard of reusable duodenoscope systems.
