PMID: 41668554
Title: User Testing of Information Materials Developed for the Australian National Lung Cancer Screening Program: A Qualitative Study.

Abstract:
The Australian National Lung Cancer Screening Program commenced in July 2025. This study aimed to explore the views of community members and the health workforce on the content, language, design and presentation of the draft information materials developed for the general population and health workforce.
Semi-structured interviews and focus groups were conducted between September and October 2024. Community members potentially eligible for the program and those interested in screening were recruited. Members of the health workforce who would be involved in screening were invited to participate. The teach-back technique assessed community members comprehension of material content. An adapted user-experience honeycomb model, along with a deductive thematic analysis approach, were used to identify aspects needing improvement.
A total of 25 community members and 44 health workforce participants took part. Shared and specific themes targeted for community and health workforces were identified. These included an appreciation for clear language; content that is comprehensive, reliable, and transparent; and visually engaging design. Specific themes focused on enhancing the practical value of the materials for target audiences; clarifying and using professional terms and concepts; and adopting user-friendly designs that accommodated the diverse needs of audience. The role of family members in encouraging screening participation should be highlighted in the information materials. A standardised approach for assessing individuals smoking history in the program's eligibility criteria is warranted.
These findings have guided the refinement of the draft informational materials developed for the general population and health workforce in the lung cancer screening program and could inform the development of materials for other cancer screening programs.
Community members and the health workforce were involved in the development of information materials.
